#  Maximum respiration rates in hyporheic zone sediments are primarily constrained by organic carbon concentration and secondarily by organic matter chemistry

This GitHub repository is associated with the publication "Maximum respiration rates in hyporheic zone sediments are primarily constrained by organic carbon concentration and secondarily by organic matter chemistry” by Stegen et al., (2023).

The study aims to test the hypothesis that organic matter (OM) can be protected from degradation (in part) by high levels of molecular diversity, using publicly available data from the Worldwide Hydrobiogeochemical Observation Network for Dynamic River Systems (WHONDRS). 

Field Sediment extracts were analyzed using ultrahigh resolution Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FTICR-MS) as part of the [WHONDRS S19S Campaign](https://www.pnnl.gov/projects/WHONDRS/summer-2019-sampling-campaign). Respiration rates were measured following methods described by [Garayburu-Caruso et., 2020](https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/acs.estlett.0c00258). 

The data from the 97 global river corridors used in this manuscript were part of a [WHONDRS](https://whondrs.pnnl.gov) study. The raw, unprocessed FTICR-MS data and respiration data can be found with additional data in the [ESS-DIVE repository](https://data.ess-dive.lbl.gov/view/doi:10.15485/1729719). Processed FTICR-MS data used in this manuscript was processed following instructions provided in the data package. This repository contains the R scripts used to generate the main figures in the manuscript as well as the version of data used for analyses, dowloaded in June 2022. Any reuse of the data should cite Goldman et al. (2020), as follows:  


Goldman A E ; Arnon S ; Bar-Zeev E ; Chu R K ; Danczak R E ; Daly R A ; Delgado D ; Fansler S ; Forbes B ; Garayburu-Caruso V A ; Graham E B ; Laan M ; McCall M L ; McKever S ; Patel K F ; Ren H ; Renteria L ; Resch C T ; Rod K A ; Tfaily M ; Tolic N ; Torgeson J M ; Toyoda J G ; Wells J ; Wrighton K C ; Stegen J C ; WHONDRS Consortium T (2020): WHONDRS Summer 2019 Sampling Campaign: Global River Corridor Sediment FTICR-MS, Dissolved Organic Carbon, Aerobic Respiration, Elemental Composition, Grain Size, Total Nitrogen and Organic Carbon Content, Bacterial Abundance, and Stable Isotopes. River Corridor and Watershed Biogeochemistry SFA, ESS-DIVE repository. Dataset. doi:10.15485/1729719 accessed via https://data.ess-dive.lbl.gov/datasets/doi:10.15485/1729719 on 2023-06-30
